NGF: Update architecture overview (#450)
nginx/documentation: content/ngf/overview/gateway-architecture.md

For a list of supported Gateway API resources and features, see the [Gateway API Compatibility]({{< ref "/ngf/overview/gateway-api-compatibility.md" >}}) documentation.

> NGINX Gateway Fabric separates the control plane and data plane into distinct deployments. The NGF control plane interacts with the Kubernetes API to watch for Gateway API resources. When a new Gateway resource is provisioned, the control plane dynamically creates and manages a corresponding NGINX data plane Deployment and Service. Each NGINX data plane pod consists of an NGINX container with the integrated [NGINX agent](https://github.com/nginx/agent), which securely communicates with the control plane over gRPC. The agent receives configuration updates from the control plane, translating Gateway API resources into the appropriate NGINX configuration. This enables multiple Gateways to be managed centrally while ensuring that each NGINX instance remains aligned with the current cluster state. Labels, annotations, and infrastructure settings such as service type or replica count can be specified globally via the Helm chart or customized per Gateway using the enhanced NginxProxy CRD and the Gateway’s infrastructure section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NGINX Gateway Fabric separates the control plane and data plane into distinct deployments. The control plane interacts with the Kubernetes API to watch for Gateway API resources. When a new Gateway resource is provisioned, the control plane dynamically creates and manages a corresponding NGINX data plane Deployment and Service. Each NGINX data plane pod consists of an NGINX container with the integrated [NGINX agent](https://github.com/nginx/agent), which securely communicates with the control plane over gRPC. The control plane translates Gateway API resources into NGINX configuration, and sends the configuration to the agent. This enables multiple Gateways to be managed centrally while ensuring that each NGINX instance remains aligned with the current cluster state. Labels, annotations, and infrastructure settings such as service type or replica count can be specified globally via the Helm chart or customized per Gateway using the enhanced NginxProxy CRD and the Gateway’s `infrastructure` section.
```

Not supposed to use acronyms for the product name.

We have more information regarding our [design principles](https://github.com/nginx/nginx-gateway-fabric/blob/v1.6.1/docs/developer/design-principles.md) in the project's GitHub repository.

---

## NGINX Gateway Fabric Deployment Model and Architectural Overview

The NGINX Gateway Fabric architecture separates the control plane and data plane into distinct and independent Deployments, ensuring enhanced security, flexibility, and resilience.

### Control Plane: Centralized Management

> The control plane operates as the `nginx-gateway` Deployment, serving as a [Kubernetes controller](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/architecture/controller/) built with the [controller-runtime](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/controller-runtime) library. It manages all aspects of resource provisioning and configuration for the NGINX data planes by watching Gateway API resources and other Kubernetes objects such as Services, Endpoints, and Secrets.

Reviewer: The name of the Deployment can change depending on the helm installation, so I don't think we need to include that name here.

### Data Plane: Autonomous Traffic Management

Each NGINX data plane pod is provisioned as an independent Deployment containing an `nginx` container. This container runs both the `nginx` process and the [NGINX agent](https://github.com/nginx/agent), which is responsible for:

- Applying configurations: The agent receives updates from the control plane and applies them to the NGINX instance.
- Handling reloads: Configuration reconciliation and reloads are executed remotely through the gRPC interface, eliminating the need for shared volumes or Unix signals between the control plane and data plane pods.

With this design, multiple NGINX data planes can be managed by a single control plane, enabling fine-grained, Gateway-specific control and isolation.

### Gateway Resource Management

The architecture supports flexible operation and isolation across multiple Gateways:

- Concurrent Gateways: Multiple Gateway objects can run simultaneously within a single installation.

> - Flexible Gateway management: Gateways can be managed via distinct GatewayClasses, allowing configuration isolation where needed.

Reviewer: There's one GatewayClass per NGF controller, so this would technically mean multiple installations of NGF. Maybe you meant distinct NginxProxy resources?

- 1:1 resource mapping: Each Gateway resource corresponds uniquely to a dedicated data plane pod, ensuring clear delineation of ownership and operational segregation.

### Resilience and Fault Isolation

One of the primary advantages of this architecture is enhanced operational resilience and fault isolation:

#### Control Plane Resilience

In the event of a control plane failure or downtime:
- Existing data plane pods continue serving traffic using their last-valid cached configurations.
- Updates to routes or Gateways are temporarily paused, but stable traffic delivery continues without degradation.
- Recovery restores functionality, resynchronizing configuration updates seamlessly.

#### Data Plane Resilience

If a data plane pod encounters an outage or restarts:
- Only routes tied to the specific linked Gateway object experience brief disruptions.

> - Configurations automatically resynchronize with the control plane upon pod restart, minimizing the scope of impact.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Configurations automatically resynchronize with the data plane upon pod restart, minimizing the scope of impact.
```
Is this what you meant?

    style HTTPRouteBAndApplicationB fill:#E0FFFF,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px

    style AppDevA fill:#FFA07A,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
    style HTTPRouteA fill:#FFA07A,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
    style ApplicationA fill:#FFA07A,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
    style ClientsA fill:#FFA07A,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px

    style AppDevB fill:#87CEEB,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
    style HTTPRouteB fill:#87CEEB,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
    style ApplicationB fill:#87CEEB,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
    style ClientsB fill:#87CEEB,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px

    style AppDevC fill:#FFC0CB,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
    style HTTPRouteC fill:#FFC0CB,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
    style ApplicationC fill:#FFC0CB,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
    style ClientsC fill:#FFC0CB,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px

    style PublicEndpointAB fill:#FFD700,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
    style PublicEndpointC fill:#FFD700,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px

    %% Styling
    classDef dashedSubgraph stroke-dasharray: 5, 5;

    %% Assign Custom Style Classes
    class DataplaneComponentsAB dashedSubgraph;
    class DataplaneComponentsC dashedSubgraph;

> ```

Reviewer: The only downside of using mermaid versus manual is it doesn't render the prettiest or most balanced diagrams. (like the giant nginx-gateway namespace box). Unless you can create a manual image and translate into mermaid?

Author: I'll see if I can tweak it a bit more, but yeah, it is an issue.

Reviewer: Yeah, that does look a bit better. Only nitpick would be the AB components are below the C components.

Author: I'll see if I can reorder them

    F5Telemetry[F5 Telemetry Service]
    Client[Client]
    Backend[Backend]

    %% NGINX Pod Grouping
    subgraph NGINXPod[NGINX Pod]
        NGINXAgent[NGINX Agent]
        NGINXMaster[NGINX Master]
        NGINXWorker[NGINX Worker]
        ConfigFiles[Config Files]
        ContainerRuntimeNGINX[stdout/stderr]
    end

    subgraph NGFPod[NGF Pod]
        NGFProcess[NGF Process]
        ContainerRuntimeNGF[stdout/stderr]
    end

    %% HTTPS: Communication with Kubernetes API
    NGFProcess -- "(1) Reads Updates" --> KubernetesAPI
    NGFProcess -- "(1) Writes Statuses" --> KubernetesAPI

    %% Prometheus: Metrics Collection
    PrometheusMonitor -- "(2) Fetches controller-runtime metrics" --> NGFPod
    PrometheusMonitor -- "(5) Fetches NGINX metrics" --> NGINXWorker

    %% Telemetry: Product telemetry data
    NGFProcess -- "(3) Sends telemetry data" --> F5Telemetry

    %% File I/O: Logging
    NGFProcess -- "(4) Write logs" --> ContainerRuntimeNGF
    NGINXMaster -- "(11) Write logs" --> ContainerRuntimeNGINX
    NGINXWorker -- "(12) Write logs" --> ContainerRuntimeNGINX

    %% gRPC: Configuration Updates
    NGFProcess -- "(6) Sends Config to Agent" --> NGINXAgent

>     NGINXAgent -- "(7) Validates Config & Writes TLS Certs" --> ConfigFiles

Reviewer: Should also have agent reloading nginx here (kill signal to master process)
